---
title: "Structure-based drug discovery with deep learning"
date: 2022-12-26T20:52:26.000Z
author: "Rıza Özçelik, Derek van Tilborg, José Jiménez-Luna, Francesca Grisoni"
weight: 2
showToc: true
TocOpen: true
draft: false
hidemeta: false
comments: false
description: "Important disclaimer: the following content is AI-generated, please make sure to fact check the presented information by reading the full paper."
disableHLJS: true # to disable highlightjs
disableShare: false
hideSummary: false
searchHidden: false
ShowReadingTime: false
ShowBreadCrumbs: false
ShowPostNavLinks: false
ShowWordCount: true
ShowRssButtonInSectionTermList: false
UseHugoToc: false
cover:
    image: "thumbnails/2212-13295v1.webp" # image path/url
    alt: "Structure-based drug discovery with deep learning" # alt text
    caption: "The full paper is available [here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.13295)." # display caption under cover
    relative: false # when using page bundles set this to true
    hidden: false # only hide on current single page
---

# Link to paper
The full paper is available [here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.13295).

You can also find the paper on PapersWithCode [here](https://paperswithcode.com/paper/structure-based-drug-discovery-with-deep).

# Abstract
- Artificial intelligence (AI) has the potential to help in drug discovery and chemical biology
- Deep learning is a type of AI that is particularly good at learning from data
- Structure-based drug discovery has the potential to tackle unsolved challenges, such as affinity prediction and binding-mechanism elucidation
- There is a "renaissance" of structure-based drug discovery using AI

# Paper Content

## Introduction
- Deep learning is a subfield of artificial intelligence (AI) based on multi-layer neural networks [1]
- Deep learning has gained remarkable traction in science and technology, e.g., to advance mathematics [2,3] , investigate galaxies [4] , and generate realistic images [5]
- Chemistry and biology have witnessed several AI breakthroughs, for instance, in protein structure prediction [6,7] , chemical synthesis planning [8,9] , and atomistic simulations [10,11]
- Drug discovery has particularly benefited from the advent of deep learning [12,13]
- Structure-based deep learning approaches -which leverage information on the target protein -have not found parallel interest yet. Structure-based drug discovery (SBDD) methods augmented with AI are arguably a more complex and a higher-potential endeavor compared to their ligand-based counterparts. Numerous marketed drugs have been identified by 'traditional' SBDD (e.g., HIV-1 protease inhibitors [23] , the thymidylate synthase inhibitor raltitrexed [24] , and the antibiotic norfloxacin [25] ). Accelerating SBDD with deep learning can help address existing drug discovery challenges, such as polypharmacology by design [26] , selectivity optimization [27] , activity cliff prediction [28] , and target deorphanization [29]
- Deep learning does not require explicit feature engineering and can thus be applied to learn directly from molecular representations of both ligands and proteins. This is particularly relevant for SBDD, where engineering numerical features for complex molecular entities like proteins [30] is inevitably more laborious than for small molecules [31]
- For SBDD, deep learning for SBDD bears an untapped potential to capture highly non-linear structure-activity relationships and has recently started to show its promise. Accurate protein structure prediction efforts like AlphaFold [6,7] are expected to further accelerate computer-assisted SBDD. Deep learning for SBDD is still in its infancy but is moving forward at a fast pace, and its relevance in the years to come is expected to increase.
- This review provides a comprehensive overview of how deep learning can be leveraged for SBDD, to incorporate protein information at different levels of complexity (e.g., aminoacid sequence, and/or tertiary structure). After addressing how proteins can be represented for deep learning, we address current state-of-the-art methods for structure-based drug discovery, with a particular focus on drug-target interaction prediction, binding site detection, and de novo design (Fig. 1). Finally, we discuss current limitations and research gaps, along with foreseen future directions and opportunities.

## Representing proteins for deep learning
- Deep learning approaches for SBDD inherently involve more intricate representation of protein information than those that are ligand-based.
- Proteins are large polypeptide chains, organized in a 'structural hierarchy' [36] : (a) primary structure, referring to the sequential arrangement of amino acids along the polypeptide chain, (b) secondary structure, capturing the occurrence of alpha-helices and beta-pleated sheets along the protein sequence, and (c) tertiary structure, capturing how proteins fold in the three-dimensional space.
- Such complexity is reflected in the various protein representations used for deep learning (Fig. 2):
- Primary (amino acid) sequence. The amino acid sequence is specified starting from the amino-terminal end (N-terminus) and ending at the carboxyl-terminal (C-terminus) end. For deep learning purposes, the primary sequence is often represented as a character string, where each letter represents one of the twenty naturally-occurring amino acids (e.g., 'AIR' corresponds to alanine, isoleucine, and arginine). These representations are at the core of established protein 'featurization' techniques, such as ProtVec [37] , SeqVec [38] , and ProtTrans [39] .
- Although less frequently encountered [40,41] , the primary sequence can also be represented as a graph, whose nodes are amino acids (featurized by type or corresponding physicochemical features) and whose edges capture their adjacency in the chain.
- Tertiary (three-dimensional) structure. The three-dimensional shape of a protein (tertiary structure) is determined by the interactions among its side chains, and features a certain degree of conformational plasticity [42] . The protein structure contains key information for SBDD, since it relates to protein function [43,44] , and it determines ligand binding [45] .

### Box 1: Glossary of selected terms
- Binding site: protein region that is responsible for the interaction with another molecule
- Convolutional neural network: neural network architecture that learns from local information on grid-like data through convolution operations
- Molecular docking: computational procedure used to predict the predominant three-dimensional binding mode(s) of a molecule w.r.t. another (macro)molecule it binds to
- Generative deep learning: deep learning methods that aim to model the underlying data distribution of a given set of samples and, by sampling from the modeled distribution, generate new data points without the need for explicit hard-coded design rules
- Geometric deep learning: umbrella term to identify neural network architectures that incorporate and process symmetry information in their design
- Molecular descriptors: numerical features obtained from a molecular representation with the goal of capturing pre-defined chemical information
- Ligand: any molecule that binds to a protein with high affinity and specificity
- Protein: (macro)molecule consisting of amino acid residues joined by peptide bonds
- Reinforcement learning: subfield of machine learning whose goal is to study the agents that learn to act towards maximizing a cumulative reward in an environment
- Simplified Molecular Input Line Entry System (SMILES): [35]
- Moreover, inducing conformational changes is often the goal of drug discovery
- Several ways exist to learn from tertiary structures with deep learning. Early approaches have used grid-based voxel representations (see Box 1) to capture the spatial distribution of the protein's physicochemical or pharmacophore properties. While these representations are suited to well-established deep learning architectures (e.g., convolutional neural networks, CNNs), many voxels representing empty space do not carry relevant information, and they involve increased computational costs at higher spatial grid resolutions. Other approaches represent proteins as molecular graphs, where each atom is a node and each bond is an edge. Depending on the chosen level of coarse-graining, often only backbone atoms are chosen to correspond to nodes, while edges often represent geometrical proximity in the coordinate space rather than direct chemical bonds. Edges and bonds can be characterized by additional geometrical and/or physicochemical properties.
- Protein surface: the protein surface is usually defined as the separation between solvent-accessible and inaccessible regions
- Protein surfaces are usually represented as either meshes (i.e., a set of polygons capturing the location of the surface, whose vertices can be described by a 2D grid or a 3D graph structure) or point clouds (i.e., graphs whose nodes describe the location of the surface at a certain resolution). Although often computed from the 3D structure, the surface representation might better reflect the physicochemical features responsible for the interaction with other (macro)molecules, as well as aspects of protein function that go beyond sequence similarity.
- The chosen protein representation for deep learning affects the type, quality, and quantity of chemical information captured. It will also affect the type of suitable deep learning strategies and the corresponding advantages and drawbacks. Additionally, the number of data available for machine learning depends on the chosen protein representation.

## Deep learning for structure-based drug discovery
- SBDD approaches rely on deep learning to identify binding sites, predict drug-target interactions, and design new proteins
- Select deep learning approaches are described through the lenses of the protein representation they rely on (sequence, structure, or surface)
- A summary of selected deep learning studies is reported in Table 2

### Drug-target interaction prediction
- Uses atom coordinates, usually of co-crystallized protein-ligand complexes, for training.
- Uses 3D grid-based approaches for lead optimization by predicting relative binding free energies linked to small modifications of ligand structures.
- Uses surface-based approaches for DTI prediction.
- Uses deep learning for ligand pose optimization, considering a rigid target structure.
- Uses a voxelized version of the protein structure combined with CNNs or graph-based representations with message-passing neural networks for DTI prediction.

### Binding site detection
- Binding site detection can be performed by predicting which residues of the amino-acid sequence are involved in ligand binding, although sequence-based approaches have found limited application.
- Early methods approached binding site detection as a 'side-product' of binding affinity prediction, by using explainable AI techniques to highlight relevant residues for a model's prediction.
- Few works have addressed binding site detection only.
- Recently, sequence-based binding site detection has been jointly modeled with drug-target affinity prediction, leading to improved performance on both tasks.
- 3D structure-based models, which use the spatial information of proteins to detect likely binding sites. Early approaches represented the protein structure with voxels featurized with pharmacophore-like properties, along with convolutional neural networks.
- BiteNet extended 'static' CNN-based approaches by incorporating conformational ensembles of proteins. The approach was later adapted to predict protein-peptide binding sites.
- A recent approach combined spatial properties with amino acid sequence information to predict protein-protein interaction sites and is applicable to ligand binding site prediction.
- Surface-based models. Voxelized representations of protein coordinates have several drawbacks, (e.g., carrying non-informative voxels that are either deeply buried and not accessible by a ligand or represent empty space, and information coarse-graining due to discretization of the input protein space).
- For this reason, several methods based on protein surfaces have been developed over the years. These approaches rely on the representation of protein structures as continuous shapes characterized by geometric and physicochemical features to perform a prediction.
- Geodesic CNNs have been used to determine interaction fingerprints of molecular surfaces, and to predict protein and ligand binding sites.
- The approach was later expanded to obtain fully-learnable protein representations.
- DeepSurf discretizes the solvent accessible surface using a combination of K-means clustering and and density reduction.
- A recent analysis of computational approaches for protein-ligand binding site recognition has shown DeepSurf to perform remarkably well.
- Despite the recent progress of binding pocket detection, room for improvement remains, e.g., to increase pocket coverage and detect sub-pockets.

### Box 2: Simplified depiction of common neural networks applied to protein representations.
- Each protein representation is useful for SBDD
- Well-established examples of protein representation architectures are recurrent neural networks (RNNs), convolutional neural networks (CNNs), and graph neural networks (GNNs)
- RNNs incorporate feedback connections that allow information in the previous inputs to flow into the subsequent inputs.
- CNNs apply learnable filters to the input and excel in capturing local patterns.
- Graph neural networks (GNNs) operate on molecular graphs and can capture the structural and functional relationships between, as well as within, atoms belonging to one or more molecular complexes.

## Gaps, opportunities, and outlook
- Deep learning is gaining increasing traction in the field of drug discovery
- Breakthroughs in protein structure prediction using deep learning exemplify the potential of deep learning in the molecular sciences
- SBDD is more challenging than ligand-based drug discovery, due to the number and structural complexity of chemical entities involved
- Most of the current SBDD algorithms are agnostic to dynamical information and might not outperform simpler methods
- However, SBDD has an untapped potential to tackle drug discovery for new, uncharted protein targets
- AI-driven SBDD has a high-risk/high-gain potential and is expected to advance future drug discovery
- An area of continuous development that bears promise for SBDD is geometric deep learning
- Geometric deep learning attempts to unify neural networks from the perspective of symmetry and topology
- Roto-translational invariance/equivariance is particularly relevant for the three-dimensional representations of molecular systems, which is beneficial to limit function search space during training
- Geometric deep learning is expected to boost AI's capability to model molecular complexes and their interactions
- Diffusion models - a family of generative models inspired by non-equilibrium thermodynamics - are also gaining increasing popularity in deep learning thanks to their generative capabilities
- These approaches have reached state-of-the-art in several deep learning applications and are expected to propel SBDD in the future
- A current bottleneck of AI-driven SBDD is constituted by the available training data
- While protein sequence information and experimental assay data are largely available, high-quality 3D data of co-crystallized proteins and ligands with accompanying properties is largely missing
- Obtaining high-quality protein structure information is resource-intensive and challenging for several drug targets
- Non-and poorly binding molecules are often strongly under-reported in medicinal chemistry datasets
- As a result, available three-dimensional datasets are often highly biased in their content
- Seve al studies have attempted to alleviate this issue, via data curation, bias-controlled training, and debiasing
- Bridging the gap between the different types of available information will be an active task in upcoming years
- Finally, the application of deep learning in well-established fields like chemical biology and medicinal chemistry might at times be met with skepticism by experimentalists
- These well-grounded concerns commonly originate from the black-box nature of deep learning
- To foster broader acceptance of structure-based deep learning, we need to 'open the box' and validate methods experimentally

## Conclusions
- Deep learning has been successful in drug discovery by finding new compounds that are more efficient than traditional methods
- There are different representations that can be used for deep learning, each suited for a different neural network architecture
- Structure-based deep learning has been successful in predicting ligands, binding sites, and other properties of proteins
