---
title: "Flow Lenia: Mass conservation for the study of virtual creatures in continuous cellular automata"
date: 2022-12-14T15:07:21.000Z
author: "Erwan Plantec, Gautier Hamon, Mayalen Etcheverry, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Clément Moulin-Frier, Bert Wang-Chak Chan"
weight: 2
showToc: true
TocOpen: true
draft: false
hidemeta: false
comments: false
description: "Important disclaimer: the following content is AI-generated, please make sure to fact check the presented information by reading the full paper."
disableHLJS: true # to disable highlightjs
disableShare: false
hideSummary: false
searchHidden: false
ShowReadingTime: false
ShowBreadCrumbs: false
ShowPostNavLinks: false
ShowWordCount: true
ShowRssButtonInSectionTermList: false
UseHugoToc: false
cover:
    image: "thumbnails/2212-07906v1.webp" # image path/url
    alt: "Flow Lenia: Mass conservation for the study of virtual creatures in continuous cellular automata" # alt text
    caption: "The full paper is available [here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.07906)." # display caption under cover
    relative: false # when using page bundles set this to true
    hidden: false # only hide on current single page
---

# Link to paper
The full paper is available [here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.07906).

You can also find the paper on PapersWithCode [here](https://paperswithcode.com/paper/flow-lenia-mass-conservation-for-the-study-of).

# Abstract
- Lenia is a family of cellular automata generalizing Conway's Game of Life to continuous space, time, and states
- Some spatially localized patterns resemble life-like artificial creatures, but they are found in only a small subspace of the Lenia parameter space and are not trivial to discover, necessitating advanced search algorithms
- We hypothesize that adding a mass conservation constraint could facilitate the emergence of SLPs
- We propose Flow Lenia, which enables mass conservation
- We show a few observations demonstrating its effectiveness in generating SLPs with complex behaviors
- Furthermore, we show how Flow Lenia enables the integration of the parameters of the CA update rules within the CA dynamics, making them dynamic and localized. This allows for multi-species simulations, with locally coherent update rules that define properties of the emerging creatures, and that can be mixed with neighbouring rules. We argue that this paves the way for the intrinsic evolution of self-organized artificial life forms within continuous CAs.

# Paper Content

## Introduction
- Continuous cellular automata (CAs) like SmoothLife or Lenia have been used to search for emergent life-reminiscent phenomenons
- Flow Lenia is a mass-conservative extension to Lenia that hypothesizes conservation laws will help in the search for artificial life-forms
- The model allows for the integration of the update rule parameters within the CA dynamics enabling the emergence of creatures with different parameters and so different properties

## Model
- Let L be the support of a CA, which is the two-dimensional grid Z 2 in the rest of this work.
- Let A t : L → [0, 1] C be CA's activations at time t, with A t i (x) the activation in location x ∈ L, channel i and time t.
- C is the number of channels of the system.
- We denote [•] b a the clip function between a and b.
- Fig. 1: Top : Lenia update rule.
- The growth U t is computed with kernels K and growth functions G (equation 3) defined by a specific parameter configuration sampled in Lenia's parameter space.
- A small portion of the growth is then added to activations A t to give the next state A t+dt .
- Bottom : Flow Lenia update rule.
- Affinity map U t is computed as in Lenia.
- The flow F t is given by combining the affinity map and concentration (i.e activations) gradients (equation 5).
- Finally, the next state is obtained by "moving" matter in the CA space according to the flow F t (equations 6 and 7).

### Lenia
- An instance of Lenia is defined by a set of convolution kernels where Each pair (K, G) is associated to a source channel c0 it senses and a target channel c1 it updates.
- The original Lenia's computation algorithm is as follows: 1) Initialize each cell of the world A0 with values in the C-dimensional unit range [0, 1] C.

### Flow Lenia
- We propose a mass-conservative extension of Lenia (Flow Lenia) which interprets activations as concentrations of matter in each cell and the potential as an affinity map.
- The basic idea is that matter will move towards higher affinity locations by flowing up the gradient in the space of U .
- We define the instantaneous speed of matter through a flow F t : L → (R 2 ) C defined as : the total mass in each location p.
- In practice, gradients are estimated through Sobel filtering.
- Map α : L → [0, 1] is used to weight the importance of each term such that −∇A t Σ dominates when the total mass at a given location is close to a critical mass θ A ∈ R >0 .
- Intuitively, the result is that matter is mainly driven by concentration gradients in high concentrations regions and is freer to move along the affinity gradient in less concentrated areas.
- We typically use n > 1 such that the affinity gradient dominates on a larger range of masses.
- Then, we can move matter in space according to flow F giving us the state at the next time step. To do so we use the reintegration tracking method proposed in [9].
- Reintegration tracking is a semi-Lagrangian grid based algorithm thought as a reformulation of particle tracking in screen space (i.e grid space) aimed at not losing information (i.e particles) which happens when two particles end up in the same cell.
- The basic principle is to work with distribution of particles (i.e infinite number of particles) and conserve the total mass by adding up masses going on a same cell.
- Overall, Flow lenia can be seen as a new kind of model at the frontier between continuous CAs and particle systems.
- Figure 2 illustrates how reintegration tracking is used in our case.
- Contrary to the original algorithm, we do not track velocities and instead use the flow as the instantaneous velocity of matter.
- We could also track velocities and use the flow as an instantaneous acceleration at the cost of memory space.
- The resulting update rule is the following :
- Where I i (p , p) is the proportion of incoming matter in channel i going from cell p ∈ L to cell p ∈ L:
- With the target location of the flow from p . Ω(p) is the domain of cell at location p, which is a square of side 1.
- D(m, s) is a distribution defined on L with mean m and variance s satisfying L D(m, s) = 1, which is in practice a uniform square distribution with side length 2s centered at m.
- This distribution emulates a flow of particles from source area Ω(p ) to target area D(p , s), where the distribution D emulates Brownian motion at the low level.
- All the elements are depicted in Fig. 2.
- Since the distribution D integrates to 1, it is clear that a cell cannot send out more mass than it contains nor less and so the system conserves its mass ( L A t i = L A t+dt i , ∀t ∈ R ≥0 , ∀i ∈ {1, .., C}).

## Parameter localization
- Flow Lenia allows to embed the update rule parameters inside the CA.
- Intuitively, we can "attach" a vector of parameters to the matter locally modifying how it behaves (i.e locally modifying how the affinity map is computed), and let it flow with it.
- Formally, this comes to defining a parameter map P : L → Θ where Θ is a given parameter set.
- This map can be used to locally modify the update rule.
- For instance, we can embed the h ∈ R |K| vector weighting the importance of each kernel in the affinity map computation (see equation 3), giving : Then parameters can be moved along with matter.
- A problem is how to mix parameters arriving in the same cell. Here we propose two different methods which are respectively average and softmax sampling.
- The former makes Algorithm 1: Flow Lenia algorithm
- Data: A 0 , K, G, dt
- t ← 0 while T rue do
- # 1. Compute affinity map with equation 3
- For each cell p, compute the incoming matter from cell p with equations 6 and 7
- a weighted average of incoming parameters with respect to the quantities of incoming matter and is formally defined as :
- Softmax sampling on the other hand samples a parameter in the set of incoming ones following the softmax distribution given by incoming quantities of matter .

## Experimental results
- SLPs can be generated by random parameter search or evolution algorithm
- Patterns (a) to (g) and (k) to (n) were found with random search in the parameter space
- Patterns (h) to (j) where found by optimizing a fitness function using evolutionary stategies
- Pattern (o) corresponds to a Fig. 3: Samples of SLPs in Flow Lenia as virtual creatures.
- Video samples can be found at https://sites.google.com/view/flowlenia/.
- The green and red colors in (i) to (n) represent two channels (as in multi-channel Lenia) multi-species simulation using the parameter localization method described in section 3.
- Moving dots (a) like those in reaction-diffusion systems are common in Flow Lenia.
- Snake-like segments (b) are also common, with interesting attraction-repulsion dynamics generating complex motion.
- Time lapse (c) to (e) demonstrates a pattern switching among different scales, from a larger structure "erupting" into smaller ones and also displaying non-trivial motion patterns.
- Moving patterns, e.g. gliding (f) and rotating (g), occur naturally from random search, but we were also able to evolve for directional movement (h, i) or angular movement (j) using the linear or angular speed of the mass center as fitness functions, respectively.
- Note the modular structures in single channel (h), and the intertwined complex structures in multi-channel (i) and (j).
- Time lapse (k) to (n) demonstrates the complex development of a pattern, from binary fission (k-m) to fusion (n).
- The masses in green channel act as propulsion parts, while red provides structural integrity and adhesion points showing some sort of modular structure.
- Multi-species simulation (o) shows the parameter localization method. Colors represent parameters locally modifying the update rule.

## Discussions
- SLPs are more common and easier to find in Flow Lenia than in previous versions of Lenia.
- During initial exploration, the SLPs found in Flow Lenia tend to be static or slowly "floating" in nearby space.
- When using simple evolutionary algorithms, SLPs with behaviors similar to the original Lenia, like perpetual gliding, rotation, or oscillation, were also found in Flow Lenia.
- Parameter localization enabled by the Flow Lenia formulation allows for multi-species simulations which would have been difficult to achieve in Lenia.
- There are several possible directions to further extend the Flow Lenia system, or using it as a platform to perform artificial life experiments that would be difficult to design and perform without the mass conservation feature.
