---
title: "Point-E: A System for Generating 3D Point Clouds from Complex Prompts"
date: 2022-12-16T23:22:59.000Z
author: "Alex Nichol, Heewoo Jun, Prafulla Dhariwal, Pamela Mishkin, Mark Chen"
weight: 2
showToc: true
TocOpen: true
draft: false
hidemeta: false
comments: false
description: "Important disclaimer: the following content is AI-generated, please make sure to fact check the presented information by reading the full paper."
disableHLJS: true # to disable highlightjs
disableShare: false
hideSummary: false
searchHidden: false
ShowReadingTime: false
ShowBreadCrumbs: false
ShowPostNavLinks: false
ShowWordCount: true
ShowRssButtonInSectionTermList: false
UseHugoToc: false
cover:
    image: "https://ik.imagekit.io/smryai/2212-08751v1_rWcOiaxBy.jpg" # image path/url
    alt: "Point-E: A System for Generating 3D Point Clouds from Complex Prompts" # alt text
    caption: "The full paper is available [here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.08751)." # display caption under cover
    relative: false # when using page bundles set this to true
    hidden: false # only hide on current single page
---

# Link to paper
The full paper is available [here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.08751).


# Abstract
- Recent work on text-conditional 3D object generation has shown promising results
- State-of-the-art methods typically require multiple GPU-hours to produce a single sample
- In this paper, we explore an alternative method for 3D object generation which produces 3D models in only 1-2 minutes on a single GPU
- Our method first generates a single synthetic view using a text-to-image diffusion model, and then produces a 3D point cloud using a second diffusion model which conditions on the generated image
- While our method still falls short of the state-of-the-art in terms of sample quality, it is one to two orders of magnitude faster to sample from, offering a practical trade-off for some use cases

# Paper Content

## Introduction
- With the recent explosion of text-to-image generative models, it is now possible to generate and modify high-quality images from natural language descriptions in a number of seconds.
- Inspired by these results, recent works have explored text-conditional generation in other modalities, such as video (Hong et al., 2022;Singer et al., 2022;Ho et al., 2022b;a) and 3D objects (Jain et al., 2021;Poole et al., 2022;Lin et al., 2022a;Sanghi et al., 2021;2022).
- In this work, we focus specifically on the problem of text-to-3D generation, which has significant potential to democratize 3D content creation for a wide range of applications such as 1. Methods which train generative models directly on paired (text, 3D) data (Chen et al., 2018;Mittal et al., 2022;Fu et al., 2022;Zeng et al., 2022) or unlabeled 3D data (Sanghi et al., 2021;2022;Watson et al., 2022).
- While these methods can leverage existing generative modeling approaches to produce samples efficiently, they are difficult to scale to diverse and complex text prompts due to the lack of large-scale 3D datasets.
- 2. Methods which leverage pre-trained text-image models to optimize differentiable 3D representations (Jain et al., 2021;Poole et al., 2022;Lin et al., 2022a). These methods are often able to handle complex and diverse text prompts, but require expensive optimization processes to produce each sample. Furthermore, due to the lack of a strong 3D prior, these methods can fall into local minima which don't correspond to meaningful or coherent 3D objects.
- We aim to combine the benefits of both categories by pairing a text-to-image model with an image-to-3D model. Our textto-image model leverages a large corpus of (text, image) pairs, allowing it to follow diverse and complex prompts, while our image-to-3D model is trained on a smaller dataset of (image, 3D) pairs.
- To produce a 3D object from a text prompt, we first sample an image using the text-to-image model, and then sample a 3D object conditioned on the sampled image. Both of these steps can be performed in a number of seconds, and do not require expensive optimization procedures.
- Figure 1 depicts this two-stage generation process. We base our generative stack on diffusion (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015;Song & Ermon, 2020b;Ho et al., 2020), a recently proposed generative framework which has become a popular choice for text-conditional image generation.

## Background
- diffusion-based models were first proposed by Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015)
- following the Gaussian diffusion setup of Ho et al. (2020), we sample from some distribution q(x 0 ) using a neural network approximation p θ (x 0 )
- under Gaussian diffusion, we define a noising process for integer timesteps t ∈ [0, T ], with the amount of noise added at each timestep determined by some noise schedule β t
- we employ a noise schedule such that, by the final timestep t = T , the sample x T contains almost no information (i.e. it looks like Gaussian noise)
- Ho et al. (2020) note that it is possible to directly jump to a given timestep of the noising process without running the whole chain: where ∼ N (0, I) and ᾱt := t s=0 1 − β t
- to train a diffusion model, we approximate q(x t−1 |x t ) as a neural network p θ (x t−1 |x t )
- we can then produce a sample by starting at random Gaussian noise x T and gradually reversing the noising process until arriving at a noiseless sample x 0
- with enough small steps, p θ (x t−1 |x t ) can be parameterized as a diagonal Gaussian distribution
- Ho et al. (2020) propose to parameterize the mean of this distribution by predicting , the effective noise added to a sample x t
- while Ho et al. (2020) fix the variance Σ of p θ (x t−1 |x t ) to a reasonable per-timestep heuristic, Nichol & Dhariwal (2021) achieve better results by predicting the variance as well as the mean
- Diffusion sampling can be cast through the lens of differential equations (Song et al., 2020), allowing one to use various SDE and ODE solvers to sample from these models
- Karras et al. (2022) find that a carefully-designed secondorder ODE solver provides a good trade-off between quality and sampling efficiency, and we employ this sampler for our point cloud diffusion models
- to trade off sample diversity for fidelity in diffusion models, several guidance strategies may be used
- Dhariwal & Nichol (2021) introduce classifier guidance, where gradients from a noise-aware classifier ∇ xt p θ (y|x t ) are used to perturb every sampling step
- Ho & Salimans (2021) introduce classifier-free guidance, wherein a conditional diffusion model p(x t−1 |x t , y) is trained with the class label stochastically dropped and replaced with an additional ∅ class
- during sampling, the model's output is linearly extrapolated away from the unconditional prediction towards the conditional prediction: for some guidance scale s ≥ 1

## Related Work
- Several prior works have explored generative models over point clouds
- Achlioptas et al. (2017) train point cloud autoencoders, and fit generative priors (either GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014) or GMMs) on the resulting latent representations
- Mo et al. (2019) generate point clouds using a VAE (Kingma & Welling, 2013)
- A growing body of work explores the problem of 3D model generation in representations other than point clouds
- Several works aim to train 3D-aware GANs from datasets of 2D images (Chan et al., 2020;Schwarz et al., 2020;Chan et al., 2021;Or-El et al., 2021;Gu et al., 2021;Zhou et al., 2021b)
- These GANs are typically applied to the problem of novel view synthesis in forward-facing scenes, and do not attempt to reconstruct full 360-degree views of objects
- More recently, Gao et al. (2022) train a GAN that directly produces full 3D meshes, paired with a discriminator that inputs differentiably-rendered (Laine et al., 2020) views of the generated meshes
- Bautista et al. (2022) generates complete 3D scenes by first learning a representation space that decodes into NeRFs (Mildenhall et al., 2020), and then training a diffusion prior on this representation space
- However, none of these works have demonstrated the ability to generate arbitrary 3D models conditioned on open-ended, complex text-prompts
- Several recent works have explored the problem of textconditional 3D generation by optimizing 3D representations according to a text-image matching objective
- Jain et al. (2021) introduce DreamFields, a method which optimizes the parameters of a NeRF using an objective based on CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)
- Notably, this method requires no 3D training data
- Building on this principle, Khalid et al. (2022) optimizes a mesh using a CLIP-guided objective, finding that the mesh representation is more efficient to optimize than a NeRF
- More recently, Poole et al. (2022) extend DreamFields to leverage a pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model instead of CLIP, producing more coherent and complex objects
- Lin et al. (2022a) build off of this technique, but convert the NeRF representation into a mesh and then refine the mesh representation in a second optimization stage
- While these approaches are able to produce diverse and complex objects or scenes, the optimization procedures typically require multiple GPU hours to converge, making them difficult to apply in practical settings
- While the above approaches are all based on optimization against a text-image model and do not leverage 3D data, other methods for text-conditional 3D synthesis make use of 3D data, possibly paired with text labels.

## Method
- Our method produces point clouds which must be preprocessed before rendering.
- Converting point clouds into meshes is a difficult problem, and the approach we use can sometimes lose information present in the point clouds themselves.
- While our method performs worse on this evaluation than state-of-the-art techniques, it produces samples in a small fraction of the time. This could make it more practical for certain applications, or could allow for the discovery of higher-quality 3D objects by sampling many objects and selecting the best one according to some heuristic.

### Dataset
- We train our models on several million 3D models
- Data formats and quality varied wildly across our dataset, prompting us to develop various post-processing steps to ensure higher data quality
- To convert all of our data into one generic format, we rendered every 3D model from 20 random camera angles as RGBAD images using Blender (Community, 2018), which supports a variety of 3D formats and comes with an optimized rendering engine
- For each model, our Blender script normalizes the model to a bounding cube, configures a standard lighting setup, and finally exports RGBAD images using Blender's built-in realtime rendering engine
- We then converted each object into a colored point cloud using its renderings
- In particular, we first constructed a dense point cloud for each object by computing points for each pixel in each RGBAD image
- These point clouds typically contain hundreds of thousands of unevenly spaced points, so we additionally used farthest point sampling to create uniform clouds of 4K points
- By constructing point clouds directly from renders, we were able to sidestep various issues that might arise from attempting to sample points directly from 3D meshes, such as sampling points which are contained within the model or dealing with 3D models that are stored in unusual file formats
- Finally, we employed various heuristics to reduce the frequency of low-quality models in our dataset

### View Synthesis GLIDE Model
- Our point cloud models are conditioned on rendered views from our dataset, which were all produced using the same renderer and lighting settings.
- To ensure that these models correctly handle generated synthetic views, we aim to explicitly generate 3D renders that match the distribution of our dataset.
- To this end, we fine-tune GLIDE with a mixture of its original dataset and our dataset of 3D renderings.
- Since our 3D dataset is small compared to the original GLIDE training set, we only sample images from the 3D dataset 5% of the time, using the original dataset for the remaining 95%.
- We fine-tune for 100K iterations, meaning that the model has made several epochs over the 3D dataset (but has never seen the same exact rendered viewpoint twice).
- To ensure that we always sample in-distribution renders (rather than only sampling them 5% of the time), we add a special token to every 3D render's text prompt indicating that it is a 3D render; we then sample with this token at test time.

### Point Cloud Diffusion
- To generate point clouds with diffusion, we extend the framework used by Zhou et al. (2021a) to include RGB colors for each point in a point cloud.
- In particular, we represent a point cloud as a tensor of shape K × 6, where K is the number of points, and the inner dimension contains (x, y, z) coordinates as well as (R, G, B) colors.
- All coordinates and colors are normalized to the range [−1, 1].
- We then generate these tensors directly with diffusion, starting from random noise of shape K × 6, and gradually denoising it.
- Unlike prior work which leverages 3D-specific architectures to process point clouds, we use a simple Transformer-based model (Vaswani et al., 2017) to predict both and Σ conditioned on the image, timestep t, and noised point cloud x t .
- An overview of our architecture can be seen in Figure 3.
- As input context to this model, we run each point in the point cloud through a linear layer with output dimension D, obtaining a K × D input tensor. Additionally, we run the timestep t through a small MLP, obtaining another D-dimensional vector to prepend to the context.
- To condition on the image, we feed it through a pre-trained ViT-L/14 CLIP model, take the last layer embeddings from this CLIP model (of shape 256 × D ), and linearly project it into another tensor of shape 256 × D before prepending it to the Transformer context.
- In Section 5.1, we find that this is superior to using a single CLIP image or text embedding, as done by Sanghi et al. (2021); Zeng et al. (2022); Sanghi et al. (2022).
- The final input context to our model is of shape (K +257)× D.
- To obtain a final output sequence of length K, we take the final K tokens of output and project it to obtain and Σ predictions for the K input points.
- Notably, we do not employ positional encodings for this model. As a result, the model itself is permutation-invariant to the input point clouds (although the output order is tied to the input order).

### Point Cloud Upsampler
- For image diffusion models, the best quality is typically achieved by using some form of hierarchy, where a lowresolution base model produces output which is then upsampled by another model
- We employ this approach to point cloud generation by first generating 1K points with a large base model, and then upsampling to 4K points using a smaller upsampling model
- Notable, our models' compute requirements scale with the number of points, so it is four times more expensive to generate 4K points than 1K points for a fixed model size
- Our upsampler uses the same architecture as our base model, with extra conditioning tokens for the low-resolution point cloud
- To arrive at 4K points, the upsampler conditions on 1K points and generates an additional 3K points which are added to the low-resolution pointcloud

### Producing Meshes
- We do not render generated point clouds directly, but convert them into textured meshes
- Producing meshes from point clouds is a well-studied, sometimes difficult problem
- Point clouds produced by our models often have cracks, outliers, or other types of noise that make the problem particularly challenging
- Rather than training new SAP models, we opted to take a simpler approach
- To convert point clouds into meshes, we use a regression-based model to predict the signed distance field of an object given its point cloud, and then apply marching cubes (Lorensen & Cline, 1987) to the resulting SDF to extract a mesh
- We then assign colors to each vertex of the mesh using the color of the nearest point from the original point cloud

## Results
- CLIP R-Precision (Park et al., 2021) metric
- Object-centric evaluation prompts
- Jain et al. (2021)
- Modified PointNet++ model
- Point cloud analogs for Inception Score (Salimans et al., 2016) and FID (Heusel et al., 2017)

### Model Scaling and Ablations
- 40M models without any image conditioning (uncond.), 40M models which condition on CLIP image embeddings of rendered images (text vec.), 40M model which condition on CLIP image embeddings of rendered images and leverage the fine-tuned GLIDE model (image vec.), 300M model with full image conditioning through a grid of CLIP latents, 1B model with full image conditioning through a grid of CLIP latents.
- The text-to-image step is worse for models without text conditioning (uncond.), models with text conditioning but no text-to-image step (text vec.), and models with text conditioning and a grid of CLIP latents (image vec.).
- Using a single CLIP embedding to condition on images is worse than using a grid of embeddings (image vec.).
- Scaling the model improves the speed of P-FID convergence and increases final CLIP R-Precision (image vec.).

### Qualitative Results
- We find that Point•E can often produce consistent and highquality 3D shapes for complex prompts.
- In Figure 2, we show various point cloud samples which demonstrate our model's ability to infer a variety of shapes while correctly binding colors to the relevant parts of the shapes.
- Sometimes the point cloud diffusion model fails to understand or extrapolate the conditioning image, resulting in a shape that does not match the original prompt. We find that this is usually due to one of two issues: 1) the model incorrectly interprets the shape of the object depicted in the image, or 2) the model incorrectly infers some part of the shape that is occluded in the image.
- In Figure 5, we present an example of each of these two failure modes.

### Comparison to Other Methods
- There is not yet a standard set of benchmarks for text-conditional 3D synthesis
- Several other works evaluate 3D generation using CLIP R-Precision
- We compare to these methods in Table 1
- In addition to CLIP R-Precision, we also note the reported sampling compute requirements for each method
- While our method performs worse than the current state-of-the-art, we note two subtleties of this evaluation which may explain some (but likely not all) of this discrepancy

## Limitations and Future Work
- Requires synthetic renderings
- Produces colored three-dimensional shapes
- Low resolution in a 3D format (point clouds)
- Limited to the creation of point clouds

## Conclusion
- Point•E is a system for text-conditional synthesis of 3D point clouds
- It first generates synthetic views and then generates colored point clouds conditioned on these views
- It is capable of efficiently producing diverse and complex 3D shapes conditioned on text prompts

## A. Hyperparameters
- We train all of our diffusion models with batch size 64 for 1,300,000 iterations
- In Table 2, we enumerate the training hyperparameters that were varied across model sizes
- We train all of our models with 1024 diffusion timesteps
- For our upsampler model, we use the linear noise schedule from Ho et al. (2020), and for our base models, we use the cosine noise schedule proposed by Nichol & Dhariwal (2021)
- For P-FID and P-IS evaluations, we produce 10K samples using stochastic DDPM with the full noise schedule
- For CLIP R-Precision and figures in the paper, we use 64 steps (128 function evaluations) of the Heun sampler from Karras et al. (2022) for both the base and upsampler models
- Table 3 enumerates the hyperparameters used for Heun sampling
- When sampling from GLIDE, we use 150 diffusion steps for the base model, and 50 diffusion steps for the upsampling model
- We report sampling time for each component of our stack in Table 4

## B. P-FID and P-IS Metrics
- To evaluate P-FID and P-IS, we train a PointNet++ model on ModelNet40 (Wu et al., 2015)
- We modify the baseline model in several ways, including doubling the width of the model and applying additional data augmentations
- To compute P-FID, we extract features for each point cloud from the layer before the final ReLU activation. To compute P-IS, we use the predicted class probabilities for the 40 classes from ModelNet40.

## C. Mesh Extraction
- To convert point clouds into meshes, we train a model which predicts SDFs from point clouds and apply marching cubes to the resulting SDFs.
- We parametrize our SDF model as an encoder-decoder Transformer.
- First, an 8-layer encoder processes the input point cloud as an unordered sequence, producing a sequence of hidden representations.
- Then, a 4-layer cross-attention decoder takes 3D coordinates and the sequence of latent vectors, and predicts an SDF value.
- Each input query point is processed independently, allowing for efficient batching.
- Using more layers in the encoder and fewer in the decoder allows us to amortize the encoding cost across many query points.
- We train our SDF regression model on a subset of 2.4 million manifold meshes from our dataset, and add Gaussian noise with σ = 0.005 to the point clouds as data augmentation.
- We train the model f θ (x) to predict the SDF y with a weighted L1 objective: Here, we define the SDF such that points outside of the surface have negative sign.
- Therefore, in the face of uncertainty, the model is encouraged predict that points are inside the surface.
- We found this to be helpful in initial experiments, likely because it helps prevent the resulting meshes from effectively ignoring thin or noisy parts of the point cloud.
- When producing meshes for evaluations, we use a grid size of 128 × 128 × 128, resulting in 128 3 queries to the SDF model.
- In Figure 7, we show examples of input point clouds and corresponding output meshes from our model.
- We observe that our method works well in many cases, but sometimes fails to capture thin or sparse parts of a point cloud.
- In our main experiments, we use a specialized text-to-image model to produce in-distribution conditioning images for our point cloud models.
- In this section, we explore what happens if we use renders from a pre-existing text-to-image model, DALL•E 2.
- In Figure 8, we present three image-to-3D examples where the conditioning images are generated by DALL•E 2.
- We find that DALL•E 2 tends to include shadows under objects, and our point cloud model interprets these as a dark ground plane.
- We also find that our point cloud model can misinterpret shapes from the generated images when the objects take up too much of the image.
- In these cases, adding a border around the generated images can improve the reconstructed shapes.

## E. Pure Text-Conditional Generation
- In Section 5.1, we train a pure text-conditional point cloud model without an additional image generation step.
- While we find that this model performs worse on evaluations than our full system, it still achieves non-trivial results.
- In this section, we explore the capabilities and limitations of this model.
- In Figure 9, we show examples where our text-conditional model is able to produce point clouds matching the provided text prompt. Notably, these examples include simple prompts that describe single objects.
- In Figure 10, we show examples where this model struggles with prompts that combine multiple concepts.
- Finally, we expect that this model has inherited biases from our 3D dataset.
