---
title: "Automatic segmentation of clear cell renal cell tumors, kidney, and cysts in patients with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome using U-net architecture on magnetic resonance images"
date: 2023-01-06T14:51:00.000Z
author: "Pouria Yazdian Anari, Nathan Lay, Aditi Chaurasia, Nikhil Gopal, Safa Samimi, Stephanie Harmon, Rabindra Gautam, Kevin Ma, Fatemeh Dehghani Firouzabadi, Evrim Turkbey, Maria Merino, Elizabeth C. Jones, Mark W. Ball, W. Marston Linehan, Baris Turkbey, Ashkan A. Malayeri"
weight: 2
showToc: true
TocOpen: true
draft: false
hidemeta: false
comments: false
description: "Important disclaimer: the following content is AI-generated, please make sure to fact check the presented information by reading the full paper."
disableHLJS: true # to disable highlightjs
disableShare: false
hideSummary: false
searchHidden: false
ShowReadingTime: false
ShowBreadCrumbs: false
ShowPostNavLinks: false
ShowWordCount: true
ShowRssButtonInSectionTermList: false
UseHugoToc: false
cover:
    image: "thumbnails/2301-02538v1.webp" # image path/url
    alt: "Automatic segmentation of clear cell renal cell tumors, kidney, and cysts in patients with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome using U-net architecture on magnetic resonance images" # alt text
    caption: "The full paper is available [here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.02538)." # display caption under cover
    relative: false # when using page bundles set this to true
    hidden: false # only hide on current single page
---

# Link to paper
The full paper is available [here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.02538).

You can also find the paper on PapersWithCode [here](https://paperswithcode.com/paper/automatic-segmentation-of-clear-cell-renal).

# Abstract
- We demonstrate automated segmentation of clear cell renal cell carcinomas (ccRCC), cysts, and surrounding normal kidney parenchyma in patients with von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) syndrome using convolutional neural networks (CNN) on Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI).
- We queried 115 VHL patients and 117 scans (3 patients have two separate scans) with 504 ccRCCs and 1171 cysts from 2015 to 2021. Lesions were manually segmented on T1 excretory phase, co-registered on all contrast-enhanced T1 sequences and used to train 2D and 3D U-Net. The U-Net performance was evaluated on 10 randomized splits of the cohort. The models were evaluated using the dice similarity coefficient (DSC). Our 2D U-Net achieved an average ccRCC lesion detection Area under the curve (AUC) of 0.88 and DSC scores of 0.78, 0.40, and 0.46 for segmentation of the kidney, cysts, and tumors, respectively. Our 3D U-Net achieved an average ccRCC lesion detection AUC of 0.79 and DSC scores of 0.67, 0.32, and 0.34 for kidney, cysts, and tumors, respectively. We demonstrated good detection and moderate segmentation results using U-Net for ccRCC on MRI.

# Paper Content

## Introduction
- The von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) syndrome is an inherited disease that manifests itself in a variety of lesions across the body, including clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC).
- Renal cell carcinoma is the leading cause of mortality in VHL patients and can range from a complex cyst to a solid tumor.
- Patients generally develop bilateral, multifocal renal tumors, often requiring multiple surgeries throughout their lifetime.
- MRI is the imaging method of choice for lifelong surveillance due to its lack of radiation.
- On the other hand, up to 90% of sporadic nonfamilial ccRCC lesions have been shown to have a VHL pathological variation.
- While any renal mass with a solid component is assumed to be malignant in VHL patients, additional characterization of a tumor (i.e., growth rate or grade) is presently unable to be assessed on a single imaging study.
- Radiomics has emerged as a powerful tool to noninvasively predict tumor biological behavior and enhance the ability to individualize treatment for patients.
- However, radiomic analysis traditionally relies on manual segmentation of tumors, which is a laborious task, particularly in VHL kidneys where numerous cysts and/or post-operative changes from multiple prior partial nephrectomies limit the ability to identify renal tumors.
- In order to improve the efficiency of radiomics workflow, such that it can be eventually implemented in a clinical setting, automated segmentation of renal lesions is warranted.
- Almost all recent research on automated RCC detection and segmentation utilizes computed tomography (CT) scans owing to the ubiquity of CT imaging for renal mass assessment and public availability of the MICCAI 2019 Kidney and Kidney Tumor Segmentation (KITS19) data set.
- KITS19 is a CT RCC grand challenge data set with the objective being to segment kidney and RCC tumors.
- The top-scoring method of KITS19 had a tumor Dice Similarity Coefficient (DSC) of 0.86.
- Vast majority (if not all) of recent renal mass segmentation methods are based on deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) (i.e., variations of 2D and 3D U-Net such as nnU-Net).
- To our knowledge, no published study has built a deep learning model based on MRI scans of VHL patients, and no current publication on MRI has examined the auto-segmentation of parenchyma, cysts, and tumors simultaneously in the kidney.

## Material and Methods

## Patient cohort
- Patients who underwent renal surgery between January 2015 and June 2021 were queried
- The research was conducted in conformity with the ethical guidelines outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki in 1964 and its subsidiary legislation
- MRIs were captured before the surgery with the average duration from MRI to surgery being 77.32 days (minimum of 1 day and maximum of 1086 days)
- Patients with no or low-quality MRIs were excluded from the study
- MRI examinations were conducted on four MRI scanners
- Additional technical information about the MRI scanners can be found in supplementary table 1
- One dose of gadobutrol (0.1 mmol per kilogram of body weight, Gadovist, Bayer, Washington, DC) was administered followed by a 20 mL saline flush
- After contrast material injection, images were acquired on axial plane during the (20 second), nephrogenic (70 second), and excretory (3 minute) phases
- Segmenting all cysts would be prohibitively laborious. The red, green, blue and cyan are kidney, cyst, tumor, and unknown lesion, respectively.

## U-Net
- The U-Net was trained to segment the kidney, cysts, and RCC tumors in 2D axial slices 10
- The U-Net in this work had some additional modifications, including using leaky ReLU (negative slope = 0.2) instead of ReLU 11
- Batch normalizations were inserted before all activations. Renal masses with unknown pathology were excluded from the learning task using an "ignore label."
- In other words, regions labeled with the ignore label did not contribute to the loss or gradient calculations.
- Using intensity thresholding, hypointense regions inside the kidney were masked out with the same ignore label to deal with the numerous unannotated cysts.
- The U-Net was initialized with random weights and trained to minimize binary crossentropy using Adam stochastic gradient descent from Kingma et al. (Learning rate = 0.001, α = 0.001,  1 = 0.9 and  2 = 0.999)
- As many annotations only featured a single annotated kidney, the U-Net was trained to segment on sagittal-halved images.
- Horizontal image flipping was used for data augmentation.
- The 3D U-Net was prepared identically as the 2D U-Net but used 32x32x32 patches owing to performance and GPU memory constraints.
- Training considered minibatches of 16 32x32x32 patches with a stride of 16x16x16.
- Inference evaluated 32x32x32 patches with a stride of 28x28x28.

## Data Preprocessing
- From each MR scan, the T1 pre-contrast, 20 second post-contrast, 70 second post-contrast, and 3-minute post-contrast images were identified
- For 3D U-Net models, images were resampled to 1mm x 1mm x 3mm while slice spacing remained the same for 2D U-Net models
- Images were registered using niftyreg (footnote with URL) which uses a combination of rigid and affine image registration
- Normalized using Rician normalization

## Statistical Analysis
- The U-Net performance was evaluated on ten randomized splits of the patients.
- Each split used 75% for training and 25% for testing.
- Ten percent of the training images were used for validation, where the dice similarity coefficient (DSC) was used to pick the best model state (every 50 epochs).
- DSC is defined as where |.| is the cardinality of a set and  unet and  gt are sets of voxel positions contained in the predicted segmentation and ground truth segmentation, respectively.
- To ensure training and test sets were representative of the full population, each randomized split was evenly sampled from a list of easy and complex cases.
- A case with 10 or more annotated cysts was considered complex.
- This gave a total of 65 easy cases and 52 complex cases.
- When evaluating DSC, all tumors were treated as one mask.
- This can cause bias toward the DSC of larger tumors.
- For this reason, we additionally measured the average per-tumor DSC by calculating the connected components of the predicted tumor mask and mapping them to ground truth tumors.
- Then we measured the DSC of overlapping connected components to get the DSC for each ground truth tumor.
- These were averaged per patient and then averaged over all patients to get the average per-tumor DSC.
- In addition to DSC, AUC of ccRCC tumor detection was also evaluated.
- For a given probability threshold, a tumor was considered detected if the 90 th percentile of the probabilities inside the tumor exceeded the threshold.
- This means that at least 10% of the tumors had probability scores exceeding the threshold.
- False positives were calculated in a similar fashion in a 5 x 5 x 5 mm grid inside the kidney, but excluding cyst, tumors, and other renal masses.
- For calculating standard deviation for AUC we used the following equition:
- where is the number of samples in the ith category, is the mean of the ith category, and is the standard deviation of the ith category.

## Computing Environment
- All experiments were run on a Linux (CentOS 7) computer.
- All experiments were run with the same input data.
- All experiments were run with the same output data.
- All experiments were run with the same number of iterations.
- All experiments were run with the same number of trials.
- All experiments were run with the same number of observations.
- All experiments were run on a Linux (CentOS 7) computer.
- All experiments were run with the same input data.
- All experiments were run with the same output data.
- All experiments were run with the same number of iterations.
- All experiments were run with the same number of trials.
- All experiments were run with the same number of observations.

## Results
- The study used an image database of 115 individuals and 117 scans with 504 pathologically confirmed ccRCCs and 1171 cystic lesions
- The mean number of ccRCC lesions per patient was 4.3 ± 3.1
- The average performances over the 10 randomized splits are shown on Table 2
- Figure 4 show examples of good and bad ccRCC segmentations
- While the lesion segmentations are relatively low on average, the U-Net was able to detect tumors with relatively high AUC (0.89) even in the worst case (i.e., >10 cysts in a kidney)
- As illustrated in Figure 5, the model accurately detected nearly 100% of the background in all splits
- Frequently, kidneys are misclassified as background, cysts as background, and tumors as either kidney or background
- As the ROC curve demonstrates, the area under the curve of 3D-U-Net performance was lower than 2D U-Net, but there was no significant difference between these two models' performances on detecting the ccRCC lesions

## Kidney

## Discussion
- This study aimed to determine if CNN (2D and 3D U-Net) could be used to automatically identify and segment ccRCC tumors from cysts and the surrounding renal parenchyma in VHL patients.
- Our algorithm had high accuracy in detecting renal tumors on MRI (AUC 0.79-0.88) and showed promise in the segmentation of these tumors (DSC 0.34-0.46).
- VHL kidneys are often comprised of numerous cysts. Locating tumors in these types of kidneys can be akin to finding a needle in a haystack; however, as we have demonstrated, artificial intelligence may help orient radiologists to these lesions, allowing for prompt and appropriate management to avoid the morbidity of metastatic disease from missed lesions.

## Comparing the performance
- By examining prior studies on CT scans, we can observe that a continual learning curve was employed to bring automatic segmentation of renal cell carcinoma to its current stage.
- KITs-19 signaled the start of a new chapter in this mission.
- The majority of models in the KITs-19 challenge demonstrated encouraging performance in terms of tumor detection and renal parenchyma detection.
- Although our study's DSC scores for tumor segmentation are not as good as those in comparable CT-based articles, we lay the groundwork for future MRI autosegmentation models.
- Additionally, MRI imaging has several challenges compared to CT, mainly the duration of scans and the effect of breathing on image quality at spatial registration.
- Breathing time shifts make image co-registration challenging.
- At the time of writing this article, no other peer-reviewed research has attempted to segment ccRCC lesions and cysts using either 2D or 3D U-Net, either in VHL patients or on MRI.
- The only comparable research to ours is the thesis of Agarwal. et al., in which they employed a similar approach for automatically segmenting the different types of RCC tumors on the nephrogenic phase.
- Our model demonstrated an improvement in tumor segmentation compared to mentioned study. It can be due to the homogeneity of our cohort of VHL patients.
- For this matter, we need to evaluate this model on sporadic ccRCC patients as well.
- Regarding auto-segmentation of kidney parenchyma, Agarwal et al., Taro Lagner et al., and the CHAOS challenge had DSC scores of more than 90% in their population of healthy volunteers. All three studies had DSC scores for kidney parenchyma better than our model.
- Results for kidney parenchyma from our method may differ from the CHAOS and KITS-19 Challenge sets due to differences in ground truth definition of "kidney" regions, for which both challenges defined foreground as kidney parencheyma and all structures contained within kidneys (tumors, cysts).
- Our results are reported for foreground label as exclusively normal kidney parenchyma. However, as previously mentioned, the kidney parenchyma in VHL patients can be altered due to surrounding multifocal cystic and solid lesions as well as postoperative changes, making segmentation more challenging than in a sporadic RCC or control population.
- Nevertheless, the model proposed in this work achieved a defensible DSC.
- Patients with VHL may develop many cystic lesions in their kidneys that can be simple or complex, with varying times containing hemorrhagic or proteinaceous products.
- An analogous population with bilateral and/or multifocal cysts are those with polycystic kidney disease (PKD).
- Kline, et al. and Mu, et al., in two separate studies, reported a DSC for segmentation of renal cysts that was better than our study.
- Different signal intensities of VHL cysts can complicate machine detection and segmentation of cysts.
- The range in cystic forms and morphologies, and the existence of numerous solid cystic lesions pathologically confirmed to be tumors (unlike PKD, complex cysts in VHL are often malignant), may account for the lower DSC found in our study.
- Another challenging aspect to detection and segmentation of structures in the kidney in our work was the presence of a many unannotated structures. Often, there are dozens of cysts (some very small) that are impossible to annotate.
- Some pathologies of suspicious masses are also unknown, as they were not excised.

## Limitation
- The study has a small sample size
- The model may be improved with the addition of other MR sequences
- The most challenging part of adding these sequences will be the coregistration

## Conclusion
- We demonstrated some encouraging findings for 2D U-Net and 3D U-Net detection and segmentation of ccRCC tumors on MRI for VHL patients.
- When the training set is representative, U-Net generalizes better, albeit the definition of representative is not yet apparent.
- Figure 1. Diagram of participants who were excluded from the study and those who were included.
- From 158 patients we included 115 images with 2 patients having both kidneys annotated (117 halved images) with 504 lesions.
- Figure 2. Workflow diagram of segmentation and architecture of both 2d and 3d U-Net.
- (A) Two-dimensional U-network architecture.
- (B) The workflow for creating ground truth begins with image acquisition and continues with segmentation and co-registration.
- Figure 3).
- Figure 3. Example of numerous unannotated cysts in ground truth mask.
- 5) computer equipped with an Intel Xeon Gold 6140 processor and NVIDIA Tesla V100x GPU and running Python 3.8 and PyTorch 1.10 configured for CUDA 10.2 and cuDNN 7.6.
- Figure 4. Examples of the best and worst U-Net test set segmentations and ground truths.
- These are the outputs of the best performing model from the best performing random split experiment.
- A. Dice score of best performance of the best model for kidney = 0.89, Cyst = 0.68, and Tumor = 0.62.
- B. Dice score of worst performance of the best model for kidney = 0.21, Cyst = 0.38, and tumor = 0.0
- Figure 5. The voxel percent confusion matrix and box plot illustrate the misclassification of each label in the 2D U-net.
- Tumor pixels are mostly detected as kidney or background falsely.
- Figure 6. Tumor Detection ROC curve. The yellow and blue shaded regions reflect two standard deviations of detection rate for a given false positive rate.
