---
title: "Myths and Legends in High-Performance Computing"
date: 2023-01-06T09:32:19.000Z
author: "Satoshi Matsuoka, Jens Domke, Mohamed Wahib, Aleksandr Drozd, Torsten Hoefler"
weight: 2
showToc: true
TocOpen: true
draft: false
hidemeta: false
comments: false
description: "Important disclaimer: the following content is AI-generated, please make sure to fact check the presented information by reading the full paper."
disableHLJS: true # to disable highlightjs
disableShare: false
hideSummary: false
searchHidden: false
ShowReadingTime: false
ShowBreadCrumbs: false
ShowPostNavLinks: false
ShowWordCount: true
ShowRssButtonInSectionTermList: false
UseHugoToc: false
cover:
    image: "thumbnails/2301-02432v1.webp" # image path/url
    alt: "Myths and Legends in High-Performance Computing" # alt text
    caption: "The full paper is available [here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.02432)." # display caption under cover
    relative: false # when using page bundles set this to true
    hidden: false # only hide on current single page
---

# Link to paper
The full paper is available [here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.02432).

You can also find the paper on PapersWithCode [here](https://paperswithcode.com/paper/myths-and-legends-in-high-performance).

# Abstract
- The high-performance computing community has a collection of myths that reflect the current era of change.
- Some of the myths are based on evidence or argumentation, but others are based on folklore.
- The collection of myths is a discussion of possible new directions for research and industry investment.

# Paper Content

## Introduction
- The high-performance computing (HPC) community has persistent myths revolving around trends of the moment.
- One may think that it's scientific reasoning all the way down in such an advanced field.
- Yet, we find many persistent myths revolving around trends of the moment.
- Since it's late 2022, we started our analysis by asking the all-knowing intelligence ChatGPT "Create myths or legends in high performance computing".
- In a HAL 9000 manner, it refused to make up something for us: "I'm sorry [Dave], but as an AI language model, I am not programmed to generate or share myths or legends. My primary function is to assist users with information and general knowledge, and I do not have the ability to create or share fictional content.".
- Thus, even the smartest of internet parrots (Bender et al. 2021) that was itself created with massive high-performace computation running on a large accelerator system still has a long way to go.
- Thus, we fall back to reasoning among the authors of this work.
- We discuss 12 of today's HPC myths, a number customary in our community, similar to a panel statement where we debate supporting and contradicting facts with a healthy exaggeration in one of those directions.
- We attempt to neither judge nor prove folklore right or wrong but instead try to stipulate an intensive discussion in the community that drives our future thinking.
- Myth 1: Quantum Computing Will Take Over HPC!
- Numerous articles are hyping the quantum computing revolution affecting nearly all aspects of life ranging from quantum artificial intelligence to even quantum gaming.
- The whole IT industry is following the quantum trend and conceives quickly growing expectations.
- The actual development of quantum technologies, algorithms, and usecases is on a very different time-scale.
- Most practitioners would not expect quantum computers to outperform classical computers within the next decade.
- Yet, we have constantly been surprised by advances in device scaling as well as, more recently, artificial intelligence.
- Thus, the fear of missing out on getting rich is driving the industry to heavily invest into quantum technologies pushing the technology forward.
- With all this investment, it seems reasonable to expect that quantum computation, which promises to deliver exponential speedups, will replace high-performance computation as we know it today with its meager linear speedup through parallelism.
- Yet, the nature of quantum computation poses some severe limitations: First, reading unstructured data into a quantum state seems very challenging.
- Reasonable future quantum computer designs can read in the order of Gigabit/s while modern single-chip processors are already achieving Terabit/s-many orders of magnitude more (Hoefler et al. 2023).
- Furthermore, once a quantum state is constructed, it can often be "used" only once because measurements destroy superposition.
- A second limitation stems from the lack of algorithms with high speedups. Most algorithms achieve quadratic speedups for a wide range of use-cases using amplitude amplification at their core.
- While this technique is extremely versatile and can search any unstructured quantum state (cf. Grover's algorithm), its limited speedup is unlikely to make it practical for quantum computers that may be constructed in the next decades.
- Thus, it seems unlikely that quantum computation is going to replace a significant fraction of traditional HPC.
- It is more likely that it will start as quantum acceleration with a small set of use-cases that may grow in the future.
- To determine which use-cases can realistically benefit from quantum acceleration, resource estimation techniques (Beverland et al. 2022) become crucial.
- But unlikely does not mean impossiblewe believe that now is the right time to begin a discussion about the...

## Conclusions
- Many myths shape the discussions in the HPC community today-in this work, we debate some of those and hope to stir up arguments.
- While we present them in an exaggerated and humorous way, many of those myths form the core of thinking in our community.
- Some may be more divisive than others but it seems that many are hard to answer definitively.
- Maybe some points will settle in the future while others will not. Yet, their sheer importance mandates a serious treatment in order to help guide future directions for academic research but also industry and government investment.
- Figure 1. Classification of Compute Kernels and Supercomputing Architecture
- Figure 2. Historical fp64 power efficiency [inGflop/s  Watt ] extrapolated until 2038 to put Intel's zettaflop/s claims into perspective.
- Figure 3. Examples of "Algorithmic Moore's Law" for different areas in HPC; Fusion energy and combustion simulations data byKeyes (2022) and climate simulation data bySchulthess (2016)
